the way in which they look at the world. He goes on to say that fantasy is
popular because looking forward is too gloomy. It's a depressing activity,
whereas nostalgia is usually a thing that people like to do. And it would be
interesting to see if you found that when you reviewed the fantasy field and
compared it with science fiction, that fantasy does go backwards for its roots.
I tend to think it does. By the way, the tape is running again, but one of the
questions I was going to ask you just a little bit later, too, was if you ever
intended to try some pure fantasy yourself. I've written only one story that I
would consider true fantasy, which is a parody or an imitation of P.G.
Woodhouse, in which I'm very fond of P.G. Woodhouse as a comedy writer, as a
humorous writer. And I wrote a story called The Marriage of True Minds, in which
I took his characters and settings and wrote a fantasy. Other than that, I don't
see that I'm strongly drawn to fantasy. Erasmus Darwin and the Erasmus Magister
stories are close to fantasy, and I don't think I will get much closer than
that. It's not where my reading interests lie, and I would find that I cannot
see quite how I would avoid trying to explain things. In writing The Selkie with
David Bischoff, one of the things I always found when we were writing was that I
have a very strong desire to explain what is happening and not be happy to leave
it as a supernatural event. And the same thing was true in writing about Erasmus
Darwin. I think that would stop me writing fantasy. I might start out thinking
it was fantasy, but if I explained it in some logical or scientific terms, then
it's no longer fantasy. Yeah, last week we talked to Damon Knight, and I talked
about his latest novel, The World and Thorinn, and I called it a fantasy novel,
and he stopped me immediately and asked me why I said it was fantasy, because it
was obviously science fiction. He provided the background in the book very
subtly, and I just hadn't picked it out carefully enough. Well, there's also a
category which I call science fantasy, in which the vocabulary of science is
used, but it's not used in any scientifically plausible way. In other words,
anybody can talk about the uncertainty principle and black holes, but if what
they then go on and do is scientific gibberish, it's using the trappings of
science, which makes it sound like science fiction, but it's really fantasy, and
you see lots of that. I don't know, I haven't read or even seen Damon Knight's
book, so I can't tell whether I would consider it science fantasy or science
fiction, and they're quite different in my mind. Anyhow, your question of a few
moments ago, I would agree that probably fantasy does go backwards, and it's
more of an escape, whereas science fiction, you have to confront things, you
have to look to the future, and some people, I guess, maybe because of the state
of the economy or something, prefer looking backwards these days. Yeah, I
believe, as a matter of fact, it's almost impossible to write science fiction in
a multiple book series, because the essence of science fiction to me is that you
are constantly moving to new things you haven't considered before. If you can
write a trilogy about something, you're probably writing fantasy, because you
don't have the constant spacing of true unknowns going on all the time through a
trilogy. You usually have a rather comfortable setting established against which
the trilogy or more books develop.
David here has just thought of a question on this topic he would like to ask
you, Dr. Sheffield. Brian. Yes, you were talking about not really being
comfortable with writing fantasy. I'd wondered, Stephen King writes horror, but
a lot of his horror fiction has science fiction background to it, like Carrie
telekinesis, that's sort of science background, but I'd wonder if you'd ever
considered writing horror. Yeah, well, this book I mentioned that I wrote in
collaboration with another Washington writer, David Bischoff, is science fiction
horror, is the closest thing we can come to describing it. An alternative type
description would be science fiction gothic, but it has explicitly gruesome
things, and it has some explicitly frightening things, and the reviewers have
been saying this is sort of Stephen King style. So I found that a very
interesting exercise, and I quite like to read horror books, and I very much
like to read Stephen King books, so I'd be quite comfortable attempting that. I
think I would find it harder to write a Salem's Lot type of book, because he
very much is writing a real supernatural vampire book in that, whereas in The
Stand, for example, he is writing what I consider to be really science fiction.
And The Dead Zone is somewhere between the two. I like that, but I felt it was
somewhere between science fiction and realism and horror. I don't know how to
define that mixture. Yeah, I thought The Stand was just a standard, although
excellently written, post-Holocaust book. That's right. It had overtones, which
are not explained as to how things happen, but it was science fiction. As much
as anything King has ever written, I think, is science fiction. I have not read
his latest collection of four novellas, though. I haven't seen that yet. I think
that's, again, a horror, though.
Okay, let me change the direction for a second here. Sometimes you write what I
guess I would call sort of a message story, something like The Man Who Sold the
Moon or Bounded in a Nutshell, where you talk about space program and so forth.
The Man Who Sold the Moon, I thought, was beautiful satire, and I wondered if
you had much reader response about that one. No, I think zero is the way to put
that. It was very much influenced by a Heinlein story, The Man Who Sold the
Moon, and it was preaching a bit. And I think that's an example where you said
there was a message, and I said I was preaching. But I haven't really had any
response. And I'm not quite sure what response I would expect for that. I think
that most people who read it and approve of it are already upset at the way we
seem to be unable to have an effective space program. So the only sort of
letters I might think I would get would be people who would agree with it. But I
haven't had those either. It really hasn't produced much reader reaction.
That series on Henry Carver that you've done, I read a little piece that you'd
written where you called it a sewage series, and I wondered why you called it
that. Well, because two of the first three involved, well, let me put it
differently. The first one of all was one involving the Matting link, which was
not particularly loathsome in any way. But then the next one was about one of
the lawyers who was working in charge of the sewers on a space station. That was
Dinsdale Descent, unduly falls into the sewer. Then another one, which is the
Dalmatian spouse, the same individual again falls into a different sewer. And
generally speaking, I regard those stories as stories in which I take ideas that
people have said are gross and unpleasant and loathsome and disgusting and put
them into stories. And one evening at dinner, we made a long list of things that
people found generally distasteful. And the suggestion was I should just write
my way through the list until I got to the end. And I find that that's all right
to a limited extent if you're writing what you hope are humorous stories, like
Parasites Lost is about a truffle pig. And the Deimos Plague is another in a
series in which a man has to safeguard two large pigs, taking them out to Mars.
The stories generally are not intended to have any message, as you might say,
the man who stole the moon has, or any redeeming features. I just write them
because I find them amusing. It's very hard to tell whether readers find them
amusing or not. So certain writers always quote those stories to me. It's
interesting. For instance, Jerry Pournelle actually remembers verbatim certain
lines from perfectly safe, nothing to worry about, and always quotes them to me.
So it obviously strikes a chord somewhere, but I never consider those stories
will be very popular. I think that they're for a rather odd sense of humor. And
some of the jokes don't work, by the way, as I found after I'd written the
stories, because certain things are said in England that are not used in
America. For example, in England, the word primate is used very commonly to mean
either a member of the gorilla, chimpanzee, or human family, and monkeys
generally, or else it's used to mean a high official of the church. Whereas I
find in this country, although the word is permitted in both senses in the
dictionaries, almost no one uses it that way. And so I wrote a joke based around
that, and to most readers, I'm sure it just fell flat. Well, we've enjoyed those
stories a great deal. In fact, I wanted to ask you if you had planned any more
of them. Well, I have one that's sitting there somewhat... I've got about eight
pages, and I stopped and did other things. A story called Space Opera, which
involves the same characters, and what happens when this producer decides to
stage a modern opera which has been written. It's called Balaclava, and they
decide to stage it in free fall with the charge of the Light Brigade and other
complications. But I haven't written the rest of it because I've been too busy
writing other things. It's sitting there over on the desk there, and sometime
I'll write it. But I write those occasionally with no fixed timetable just when
I feel like it. Another one of your short stories, the one that was entitled
Forefather Figure, you had an afterword to that where you said time travel into
the past would be absolutely impossible. And I've been reading a lot recently in
my science magazines about physicists talking about time travel, and I wondered
why you thought it would be absolutely impossible. Well, the magazine articles
usually make use of certain properties of rotating black holes or rotating
massive cylinders in which there appears to be something peculiar going on on
the time axis. But as I mentioned in the afterword, the idea that a person can
go back in time and do something which then leads to his own disappearance and
his own never having existed seems to me a very severe logical problem. If
somebody can go back and essentially cause themselves never to have been there,
then that's a disturbing situation.
The usual explanation as to what happens is that at that point, if you like,
time moves off onto a different branch, almost like throwing the points on a
railway line. But the fact then is that you have not changed what the original
timeline looked like. It's a very confusing situation. As people have said, our
desire to have things causally related, causally effectively related, is a
function of the way our brains operate and not necessarily the way that the
universe operates. But even given, I'll admit that, but I still find it hard to
see how you can explain this grandfather paradox in that I will use my time
travel, go back and shoot my grandfather before my father was conceived. At
which point, I will have ceased to exist. And on the other hand, I've only
ceased to exist because I went back and shot my grandfather. So it's an absolute
paradox that you can't explain because if I didn't exist, I couldn't have shot
him. I just don't see a way out of that.
Okay. Of course, today, there are a number of scientists like yourself who do
write science fiction. And I wondered, I guess you've sort of answered this or
alluded to it a few times in the interview. How do you find the time to write
and still practice your profession as a scientist? Well, I don't write as much
as what my wife would call real writers write. Full-time writers should be able
to produce a lot more than I do. One reason I produce as much as I do produce is
because I enjoy it. I consider it a form of pleasure and relaxation. And so I do
it for choice when I'm not doing other things. But I feel that if I didn't have
a job, I might write a lot more, but I would probably enjoy it a lot less. And
in terms of somebody who is prolific, I don't produce much at all. If you look
at the productivity of, well, now I have to think of somebody who's prolific. I
suppose Andy Offutt has written a couple of hundred books, probably. C.J. Cherryh
produces, I think, probably three books a year. Jack Chalker produces probably
five books a year. Silverberg, when he was writing full-time, produced, Lord
knows how many words a year, one and a half million, two million, something like
this. In terms of productive people, I have a minute output. Well, as a reader,
I sort of lament that fact because I think you're one of the very best writers
around and I would like to see you write a lot more if you'd had the time. In
fact, I feel guilty right now taking your writing time from you. I appreciate
the compliment, but I suspect that if I had more time, I wouldn't write that
much more. I would find other ways of doing things. I probably, if I had half a
day to write, in other words, if I worked half-time at my job instead of full
-time, I would produce more that I might saturate because it would cease to be
enjoyable after doing it for a certain period each day. The definition that
people use of a real writer is somebody who has to write, who will starve if
they can't write and will write even if they have to starve. I don't know if
that makes sense. By those terms, I don't consider I'm a real writer at all
because, although I like to write, it's not the top of my priority of things I
want to do. And the scientific work occupies a higher slot. Marion Zimmer Bradley
said that when she had to choose between a marriage and her writing or anything
else and her writing, her writing wins. That it's the most important thing in
her life. I just don't have that much attachment to it. And I think the fact
that I didn't write for so long that I started for no particular reason after
not writing for a long time may be one of the reasons I don't consider I'm a
true writer. I never felt the urge to write when I was young. I never felt that
fiction was something I had to do. But many writers have that and it dominates
their lives.
Okay, I just have a few more here. I'm sort of winding down. Fine. Are you
involved today in conventions and fan communication and so forth? Well, I always
go to Balticon and I always go to Disclave and I always go to Unicon and I
always go to Philcon. They're all easy because they're all within 150 miles of
fear. I don't usually go to conventions that are more distant largely because of
the amount of time they take. I enjoy them very well but it's a time consuming
activity and I run out of time. I don't have enough time to do the things I'd
like to do but I do enjoy convention atmospheres and I like being on panels and
I like talking to readers and I find it all very relaxing and enjoyable but
there's a limit to the amount that I can do. For example, I probably will not
get out to Worldcon which is this weekend because I have a deadline for a non
-fiction piece of work that I feel I want to make. If I were writing full-time I
might get to more conventions but as it is I have to be rather sparing in my
going off and sitting in con suites and drinking beer. Besides the book
Earthwatch and its sequel, what kinds of places take your non-fiction
publications? Well, I just had a lengthy article on remote sensing satellite
systems in a thing called the Interdisciplinary Science Review which was rather
amusing because the article before mine was an article by Arthur Clarke on
telecommunications for the third world and he wrote me a note a couple of weeks
ago and my article came straight after his and he wrote me a little note that
said if you don't stop following me around like this I'm going to call a cop
which is a reference back to The Founders of Paradise and the Way Between the
Worlds but that was a fairly long article I'm doing a book now which will come
out from William Morrow next year on space careers which is how to go about
getting jobs in the space program and that's going to require a lot of time and
it's a case where I couldn't afford to write that book if I didn't have a job or
a writer and writing for a living I couldn't afford to write a book which is
really non-commercial but I'm doing it because I think it's an important book
and that's one of the luxuries of having a job you can afford to write things
that are intrinsically non-commercial I also have to write a paper by the end of
the year a general survey paper of satellite imaging systems for the Journal of
the American Astronautical Society what I'm hoping to do there is to kill two
birds with one stone and use the same paper as an image processing meeting in
Paris in November so I try to just like writers recycle their stories use the
plot twice I think I'm doing the same thing non-fictionally by making a paper
and a talk come from a single written work if I remember correctly your advanced
degree is in theoretical physics how does that relate to the satellite job that
you do does that come naturally from it pretty much what happened is I was
solving problems in physics using computers and
started to solve problems connected with orbit computation using the same
mathematical methods or variations of them that I had been using already in
physics that led me into orbit computation it led me into NASA that led me to be
asked to take a look at the Earth resources program which was just beginning to
see what computational requirements that would have and that led me on into the
Earth sensing satellite business so it's all connected in a rather peculiar but
logical way but there is a chain that you can connect from the physics to the
present activity and it's been somewhat accidental as usual in life at certain
times you meet people who then do other things and involve you in them I find
that happens quite a lot it's like in writing I find that I meet writers and
before I know it I'm writing things that I never expected to write just because
I met them and later on they come back and tell me they're doing a particular
anthology or something and before I know it I'm committed to doing a story the
same sort of thing happens in the scientific work that you build up a chain of
acquaintances that somewhat dictates what you'll do next okay I would assume I
would almost be certain of this but that you are an optimistic person in regard
to man's future his use of his technology and his capacity to save the Earth
from destruction would that be correct? generally speaking so I think everybody
is almost I ran a panel a couple of months ago in which I asked every science
fiction panelist if they were essentially optimistic that we would be able to
solve our problems and when you got down to it they all said yes I feel the same
because I don't think the alternative is productive in other words if you say no
then you're led to conclude you may as well give up if you say yes then you look
for methods for solving the problem if you look for mechanisms as to how to do
it that's much better to me than sitting around and assuming that we're going to
die in pollution and overpopulation I certainly am convinced that we have
problems ahead in the next century but I'm also convinced that we will have
solutions available through our technology and we just have to be ready to apply
them we do have to have an active program for exploring off the earth because
most of the resources available to us happen to be off earth the energy and
material resources of the solar system are much more abundant than we can get by
harnessing what power we have or what minerals we have down here so we have to
do things we're not doing now but given that framework I'm optimistic I'm
optimistic about most things I think and I don't consider for example I could be
a generally pessimistic writer there are some writers I find have a very
consistent down tone to their writing a depressing tone and I find that I don't
like to read that and I don't think that I would like to write it and I think
the reason I don't like to read it or write it is because inside I'm optimistic
about things
ok excellent I'm down to two more now could you just briefly tell me you're
president still I assume of the American Astronautical Society no I'm not I'm
now the past president and I'm on the board of directors but I serve my time
you're only allowed to serve for a limited period so I serve my time but I'm
still on the executive committee which is the central group that runs the
society along with the board of directors and I'm still on the board of
directors and I'm still active in it I was out there last Friday arranging for
the Houston meeting which comes up in October and the Goddard Memorial Symposium
next spring ok my question was going to be though just I'm not familiar with
that what like what the purpose of it is and what it does the society in the
broad sense the objective of the American Astronautical Society is to promote
the space program and in particular the American space program and to work on
its behalf and argue to the public to Congress to anyone else that it's a good
thing to have it's a society that has picked its members somewhat carefully I
feel for example on the board of directors of the society James Beggs who is the
present national administrator is a director Harrison Schmidt who is the
astronaut and the senator from New Mexico and head of the senate space
activities is on the board of directors Ron Flipper who is the head of the space
application subcommittee on the house side is one of the directors Don Pukwe who
is the head of the science technology committee is on the board we have a lot of
people who are vice presidents or presidents of aerospace activities and it's a
group of people who believe that the space program is important because of the
way in which it relates to the country's overall science and technology
development I happen to regard the technology of the country at the moment as
somewhat in the doldrums I think that US technology and US science has taken a
licking over the past few years but I feel that it is important to the economy I
think if you're technology groups you have recessions and your economy goes
downhill I feel that the space program is a very good stimulant for that economy
as well as holding out these longer term potentials for solving really bad
problems at the end of this century and early in the next century and the AAS
the American Astronautical Society generally has these goals which is in favor
of science in favor of technology and promoting where possible I don't mean
lobbying because we don't lobby but promoting the space program through
technical activities through technical meetings and science fairs this type of
thing okay my last question would you've sort of alluded to these things
scattered throughout the interview but could you draw together for me the things
you're writing on now and your future plans for fiction right well what I'm
writing right now is the book called Man on Earth which is about artificial
earth sensing satellites and there's more pictures and text describing what man
is doing to the Earth and on the Earth cities dams land reclamation this type of
thing that will be finished by the middle of October and will come out next
spring then I'm writing a book on space careers with a lady called Carol Rosen
who has worked a lot on space movement activities that will be finished in
February and will probably come out about the middle of next year and I'm
writing a book called the McAndrew Chronicles which is really more that I'm
writing the last story of a series of stories most of which have already been
published in Analog or galaxy about a physicist called McAndrew that I expect to
be out again next spring and when those are finished I can get back to something
that I started and got about 60 pages done and then other things intruded it's a
hard science fiction novel called Between the Strokes of Night which is quite
ambitious in terms of the scale that it takes place on it begins about 1990 and
it goes out to about 26,000 AD but it does so through a peculiar technique in
which I have different groups of people who live at different subjective rates
in other words they discover techniques in which you can remain alert but you
subjectively time passes very very slowly and in order for that to be done it's
necessary that people must live in a low gravity environment because otherwise
they cannot react quickly enough to external stimuli they would fall over before
they knew it and that novel which it will be will probably occupy me most of
next year when I've got these other things done and I will keep on writing short
stories I suppose just as when I can but I never know quite when I'll write one
of those I'll probably write a story for an anthology that Susan Schwartz is
going to do called Habitats but I haven't started to sit down and write it well
you can I hope you'll accept a request from me to do some more Erasmus Magister
stories I'll do my best yes it's interesting one of the things I have to do is
find out how people react to those generally I don't know yet but I'm glad to
hear that you like them that's a good sign ok listen before we shut this down is
there anything you have by way of crusades or pet peeves or anything you'd like
to say or get on the air no I don't think so I think I'm generally as you said
earlier optimistic and I'm not particularly grieved with most things around me I
have things I don't like but I like to work for the causes I approve of and
against the causes I disapprove of and one of the things that I've noticed is
that it's more effective to go and do things for causes you like or against
causes you dislike than talk about your likes and dislikes so put me down as a
generally relatively cheerful person I don't have a large number of pet thieves
and I don't have any real chips on my shoulder a lot of my friends at the moment
are very upset about the publishing business for instance and I consider it to
be chaotically organized but I think that will take care of itself that's just
evolution at work
okay Dr. Sheffield you've been very gracious to us giving us this much time I
understand how busy you are and we really appreciate it well I hope you get
something usable we will what we will do now we have a lead time of about six to
eight weeks before these get on the air so when we've got them edited we will
send you copies okay and if I can find out the we don't know exactly what
stations will have us in the fall but when I find out if you're interested I can
send you a list of those in case there's one in your area yeah I would be
interested okay we will look forward to your future work and we thank you very
much for your time okay thank you and I'll go and I'll go and write something
okay I've got my Apple computer on over in the corner but I all right Apple
computer all right okay thank you sir bye